[Music]
think about it if everything started
with a big bang what was before that how
big is our universe if it keeps
expanding will it ever stop there so
little we know about the endlessness of
space but scientists do have some
incredible theories first a short trip
down memory lane a mere hundred years
ago people believed the cosmos consists
entirely of one galaxy our own Milky Way
scientists didn't know the age of the
universe or that we live in just one
tiny piece of it there was no Big Bang
either the first person to notice that
our galaxy has friends countless other
galaxies and interstellar clouds was
Edwin Hubble yeah that Hubble
he found some objects are too far away
to be in our Milky Way he later
discovered that the greater the distance
from Earth the faster a galaxy moves
away from us this is known as Hubble's
law and it means our universe is
constantly expanding the next question
was where did this expansion start using
complex mathematical equations I
couldn't even begin to describe
scientists sort of rewound time back to
the very beginning what they found a
huge explosion could have caused the
expansion and thus we got the Big Bang
model the Big Bang Theory is one of the
most accepted explanations for the
origins of our universe it says that
about fourteen billion years ago
everything was all tightly packed into
one super hot incredibly dense point
there were no stars no atoms no space or
time there was nothing suddenly that
point started to expand or stretch and
it didn't waste time doing it
think of it this way within a teeny tiny
fraction of a fraction of a second the
universe doubled its size almost 100
times in just the blink of an eye that
initial point grew from the size of an
atom to the distance between the Sun and
the nearest stars as the universe took
up more space the temperature dropped
tiny particles of light and energy
formed atoms those atoms grouped
together and built the universe we know
and live in the next question where did
that little tiny point come from what
was there before it well maybe there was
nothing at all just like an astronomer
can't look at cosmic objects without a
powerful telescope physicists have no
instruments to understand what was
before all of existence and we really
can't use the word before because at
that point time didn't even exist today
astronomers can observe only part of the
universe the real thing is probably 250
times larger than what we can see if you
travel from one edge of the observable
universe to the other going the speed of
light it would take you 93 billion years
but everything you'll see stars planets
nebulae galaxies you name it makes up
only 5% of the universe's mass the rest
of it appears to be
dark matter and dark energy dark matter
has often been dubbed the glue that
holds our universe together it doesn't
absorb reflect or emit light so it's
completely invisible but scientists know
that it exists because they see the
effects it has on other visible objects
sort of like how you can't see the wind
but you can notice it blowing the trees
this mysterious invisible matter makes
up 27% of our universe if dark matter is
the glue then dark energy is like a hand
trying to rip apart whatever that glue
is holding together you already know
that since the Big Bang our universe has
been getting bigger scientists noticed
the universe doesn't grow at a constant
rate the expansion is accelerating dark
energy is that force making our universe
larger and larger and it makes up 68% of
its content now if we can't find out
what's beyond the observable universe
and we can't even see 95% of what exists
then we can only theorize but was before
the Big Bang the theory of cosmic
inflation the core of this idea is the
concept of a false vacuum to put it
simply imagine stretching a piece of
rubber tension appears and the rubber
contracts you can keep stretching it out
but it'll always fight the tension and
want to go back to its normal state this
makes a false vacuum super unstable it
constantly decays into a normal vacuum
during decay all this energy must go
somewhere so it
Kosmic natural selection proponents of
this theory suggests that a collapsing
black hole created our universe which
contains black holes which then create
other universes on the other side with
each creation a universe is a little
different from the one the black hole
existed in the multiverse theory so
based on those theories looks like we're
dealing with a series of big bangs that
means there must be multiple universes
created every moment that also means we
have an infinite number of parallel
universes where thousands of your copies
exist okay we're living in a multiverse
created by Big Bang's from a false
vacuum where does all the energy for the
birth of a universe come from though the
theory is complex the answer is fairly
simple there's no need for energy to
create a universe because the total
energy of it is zero the universes come
randomly from nothing like bubbles in a
boiling pot the collapsed universe
theory this one says that after many
billions of years the previous universe
collapsed and exploded into our current
one if you like this idea you'll be glad
about having Albert Einstein on your
side his idea was that the universe can
survive an endless cycle of large
explosions and contractions if so then
the Big Bang wasn't unique it's just one
explosion in a series of others if we
accept this theory there's still one
question left where did the first one in
the series come from nobody knows
maybe the universe was always there our
brains just have a hard time imagining
it Stephen Hawking once said that trying
to understand what was before the Big
Bang is like trying to figure out what
south of the South Pole
if Einstein was right the expansion of
the universe won't continue forever at
some point everything we know will
contract and then collapse to produce a
new one this event is called the Big
Crunch but good news scientific research
shows that this theory isn't correct
right now the expansion of the universe
is still accelerating so there's nothing
to worry about string theory it was
supposed to be the one to bring it all
together the theory of everything the
core of string theory is the idea that
the world around us consists of
ultra-microscopic vibrating strings but
for it to work the universe would need
ten dimensions nine of space and one of
time the problem we only have three
length width and depth it sounds totally
bizarre but the math in this theory
actually checks out it might not explain
what was before the Big Bang
but maybe scientists will find a way to
use it in the future